NEW DELHI: Throw Ravichandran Ashwin a track offering some assistance to spin and he will make any batsman dance to his tune, no matter what his reputation is. At Holkar, he gave yet another example of his control and guile and why he is rated as the best offspinner in the world currently. Ask Kane Williamson, rated as the finest batsman to have come out of New Zealand, who lost his wicket four overs into the second session while attempting a cut that resulted in him dragging the ball back onto the stumps. By the time the day ended, Ashwin had completed his 20th five-wicket haul to finish with 6/81 as New Zealand crumbled to 299 all-out, handing India a big 258-run first innings lead on Monday.
When the stumps were drawn, India had added 18/0, extending their lead to 276 runs although they lost opener Gautam Gambhir who retired after injuring his right shoulder.
Ashwin extended Ross Taylor's (0) wretched run of the tour. Playing for the turn, he ended up playing inside the line to edge a catch towards the first slip. Much was expected from Martin Guptill and he was delivering but was unlucky to be run out backing up after BJ Watling's straight drive deflected towards the stumps at the non-strikers end as Ashwin just about managed to get his fingers onto the ball. He scored 72. Luke Ronchi edged was also caught by Rahane at first slip off Ashwin for a duck. From 118/0, the Kiwi ship had sunk to 148/5.
James Neesham and Watling attempted a resurrection and succeeded in pushing the score past 200 runs but then Ravindra Jadeja got into the act, ending the latter's 48-ball resistance. Neesham though went on to complete his fourth Test fifty but was a victim of a dubious lbw decision that ended his fluent 71-run knock which gave Ashwin his another five-wicket haul in Tests. And then he polished off the tail with the run out of Patel, in a similar manner to Guptill's and finally added the sixth with the scalp of Trent Boult with India deciding against enforcing the follow-on.
After two days of hard work, New Zealand openers gave their team something to cheer about in their pursuit of India's first innings total of 557/5d. Guptill and Tom Latham struck fifties each, adding 118 runs - the first century stand for the first wicket in the series.